---
lab:
    title: 'Lab: Monitoring services that are deployed to Azure'
    az204Module: 'Module 12: Monitor and optimize Azure solutions'
    az020Module: 'Module 11: Monitor and optimize Azure solutions'
---

# Lab: Monitoring services that are deployed to Azure
# Student lab manual

## Lab scenario

You have created an API for your next big startup venture. Even though you want to get to market quickly, you have witnessed other ventures fail when they don’t plan for growth and have too few resources or too many users. To plan for this, you have decided to take advantage of the scale-out features of Microsoft Azure App Service, the telemetry features of Application Insights, and the performance-testing features of Azure DevOps.

## Objectives

After you complete this lab, you will be able to:

-   Create an Application Insights resource.

-   Integrate Application Insights telemetry tracking into an ASP.NET web app and a resource built using the Web Apps feature of Azure App Service.

## Lab setup

-   Estimated time: **45 minutes**

## Instructions

### Before you start

Make sure the following tools are installed on your machine
- Microsoft Edge
- Windows PowerShell
- Visual Studio Code

### Make an F:\ drive:
In order to create a VHD on Windows 10, do the following:
1. Open Start.
1. Search for Disk Management and click the top result to launch the experience.
1. Click the Action button.
1. Click the Create VHD option.
1. Click the Browse button and locate the folder you want to store the virtual disk.
1. In the "File name" field enter a name for the drive.
1. Use the "Save as type file" drop-down menu and select Virtual Disk files (.vhdx) . Or select Virtual Disk files (.vhd) if you're planning to create a VHD file.
1. Click the Save button.
1. Under "Virtual hard disk size," specify the size of the drive in megabytes (MB), gigabytes (GB), or terabytes (TB).
1. Under "Virtual hard disk format," select the VHDX option. (While using a VHDX format is recommended, you can also select the VHD format, but use it only if required.)
1. Under "Virtual hard disk type," select the Dynamic expanding option. (If you have selected the VHD format in the previous step, it's recommended to select the Fixed size option when selecting a type.)
1. Click OK.

Once you complete these steps, you'll have created a VHD that you can then set up and use with any compatible version of Windows.

#### How to set up a VHDX or VHD on Windows 10

1. Using the above steps, you created a VHD, but it's empty without any data or file system. To make it useful, you need to initialize the disk, create a partition, and format the drive using these steps:
1. Right-click the newly created drive button on the far-left side, and click the Initialize Disk option.
1. Select the disk from the list.
1. Check the MBR (Master Boot Record) option. (You could also select the "GPT (GUID Partition Table)" option, but this option isn't supported by all versions of Windows.)
1. Click OK.
1. Right-click the Unallocated space, and select the New Simple Volume option.
1. Click Next.
1. Specify the size of the partition. (Leave this option unchanged if you're planning to use all the available space for the partition.)
1. Click Next.
1. Using the drop-down menu, select the drive letter you want to assign to the drive.
1. Click Next.
1. Under the Format this volume with the following settings section, make sure to use the following options: 
    * File System - NTFS. 
    * Allocation unit size - Default. 
    * Volume label - Use the name of the drive file, but you can enter any name. 
    * Perform a quick format - Formats the drive faster. 
    * Enable file and folder compression - If it's not required, don't select it (optional).
1. Click Next.
1. Click Finish.

After completing these steps, the VHDX or VHD will be initialized, partitioned, and formatted.
The VHD will mount automatically, and you can now access and save files using File Explorer.


#### Make sure to get the labs source and instructions from
https://github.com/betabitnl/AZ-204-DevelopingSolutionsforMicrosoftAzure

1. Click Code
1. Click download zip
1. Open zip 
1. Extra All file to F:\

### Exercise 1: Create and configure Azure resources

#### Task 1: Open the Azure portal

1.  On the taskbar, select the **Microsoft Edge** icon.

1.  Sign in to the Azure portal (<https://portal.azure.com>).

1.  At the sign-in page, enter the email address for your Microsoft account, and then select **Next**.

1.  Enter the password for your Microsoft account, and then select **Sign in**.

    > **Note**: If this is your first time signing in to the Azure portal, a dialog box will display offering a tour of the portal. Select **Get Started** to skip the tour and begin using the portal.

#### Task 2: Create an Application Insights resource

1.  Create a new Application Insights account with the following details:
    
    -   New resource group: **MonitoredAssets**

    -   Name: **instrm*[yourname]***

    -   Region: **(Europe) West Europe**
    
    -   Resource Mode: **Classic**

    > **Note**: Wait for Azure to finish creating the storage account before you move forward with the lab. You'll receive a notification when the account is created.

1.  Access the **Properties** section of the **Application Insights** blade.

1.  Get the value of the **Instrumentation Key** text box. This key is used by client applications to connect to Application Insights.

#### Task 3: Create a web app by using Azure App Services resource

1.  Create a new **web app** with the following details:

    -   Existing resource group: **MonitoredAssets**
    
    -   Web App name: ***smpapi\***[yourname]***

    -   Publish: **Code**

    -	Runtime stack: **.NET Core 3.1 (LTS)**

    -	Operating System: **Windows**

    -	Region: **West Europe**

    -	New App Service plan: **MonitoredPlan**
    
    -	SKU and size: **Standard (S1)**

    -	Application Insights: **Enabled**

    -	Existing Application Insights resource: **instrm*[yourname]***
  
    > **Note**: Wait for Azure to finish creating the web app before you move forward with the lab. You'll receive a notification when the app is created.

1.  Access the web app with a prefix of **smpapi\*** that you created earlier in this lab.

1.  In the **Settings** section, go to the **Configuration** section.

1.  Find and access the **Application Settings** tab in the **Configuration** section.

1.  Get the value corresponding to the **APPINSIGHTS\_INSTRUMENTATIONKEY** application settings key. This value was set automatically when you built your web app.

1.  Access the **Properties** section of the **App Service** blade.

1.  Record the value of the **URL** text box. You'll use this value later in the lab to make requests against the API.

#### Task 4: Configure web app autoscale options

1.  Go to the **Scale out** section of the **App Services** blade.

1.  In the **Scale out** section, enable **Custom autoscale** with the following details:
    
    -   Name: **ComputeScaler**
    
    -   In the **Scale mode** section, select **Scale based on a metric**.
    
    -   Minimum instances: **2**
    
    -   Maximum instances: **8**
    
    -   Default instances: **3**
    
    -   Scale rules: **Single scale-out rule with default values**

1.  Save your changes to the **autoscale** configuration.

#### Review

In this exercise, you created the resources that you'll use for the remainder of the lab.

### Exercise 2: Monitor a local web application by using Application Insights

#### Task 1: Build a .NET Web API project

1.  Open Visual Studio Code.

1.  In Visual Studio Code, open the **Allfiles (F):\\Allfiles\\Labs\\12\\Starter\\Api** folder.

1.  Use the Explorer pane in Visual Studio Code to open a new terminal that has the context set to the current working directory.

1.  At the command prompt, create a new .NET Web API application named **SimpleApi** in the current directory:

    ```
    dotnet new webapi --output . --name SimpleApi
    ```

1.  Import version 2.14.0 of **Microsoft.ApplicationInsights** from NuGet to the current project:

    ```
    dotnet add package Microsoft.ApplicationInsights --version 2.14.0
    ```

    > **Note**: The **dotnet add package** command will add the **Microsoft.ApplicationInsights** package from NuGet. For more information, go to [Microsoft.ApplicationInsights](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.ApplicationInsights/2.14.0).

1.  Import version 2.14.0 of **Microsoft.ApplicationInsights.AspNetCore** from NuGet to the current project:

    ```
    dotnet add package Microsoft.ApplicationInsights.AspNetCore --version 2.14.0
    ```

    > **Note**: The **dotnet add package** command will add the **Microsoft.ApplicationInsights.AspNetCore** package from NuGet. For more information, go to [Microsoft.ApplicationInsights.AspNetCore](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.ApplicationInsights.AspNetCore/2.14.0).

1.  Import version 2.14.0 of **Microsoft.ApplicationInsights.PerfCounterCollector** from NuGet to the current project:

    ```
    dotnet add package Microsoft.ApplicationInsights.PerfCounterCollector  --version 2.14.0
    ```

    > **Note**: The **dotnet add package** command will add the **Microsoft.ApplicationInsights.PerfCounterCollector** package from NuGet. For more information, go to [Microsoft.ApplicationInsights.PerfCounterCollector](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Microsoft.ApplicationInsights.PerfCounterCollector/2.14.0).

1.  Build the .NET web app:

    ```
    dotnet build
    ```

#### Task 2: Update application code to disable HTTPS and use Application Insights

1.  Use the Explorer in Visual Studio Code to open the **Startup.cs** file in the editor.

1.  Find and delete the following line of code at line 39:

    ```
    app.UseHttpsRedirection();
    ```

    > **Note**: This line of code forces the web app to use HTTPS. For this lab, this is unnecessary.

1.  In the **Startup** class, add a new static string constant named **INSTRUMENTATION_KEY** with its value set to the instrumentation key that you copied from the Application Insights resource you created earlier in this lab:

    ```
    private static string INSTRUMENTATION_KEY = "{your_instrumentation_key}";
    ```

    > **Note**: For example, if your instrumentation key is ``d2bb0eed-1342-4394-9b0c-8a56d21aaa43``, your line of code would be ``private static string INSTRUMENTATION_KEY = "d2bb0eed-1342-4394-9b0c-8a56d21aaa43";``

1.  Add a new line of code in the **ConfigureServices** method to configure Application Insights using the provided instrumentation key:

    ```
    services.AddApplicationInsightsTelemetry(INSTRUMENTATION_KEY);
    ```

1.  Save the **Startup.cs** file.

1.  If it's not already open, use the Explorer in Visual Studio Code to open a new terminal with the context set to the current working directory.

1.  Build the .NET web app:

    ```
    dotnet build
    ```

#### Task 3: Test an API application locally

1.  If it's not already open, use the Explorer in Visual Studio Code to open a new terminal with the context set to the current working directory.

1.  Run the .NET web app.

    ```
    dotnet run
    ```

1.  Open a new **Microsoft Edge** browser window.

1.  In the open browser window, go to the **/weatherforecast** relative path of your test application that's hosted at **localhost** on port **5000**.
    
    > **Note**: The full URL is <http://localhost:5000/weatherforecast>.

1.  Close the browser window that you recently opened.

1.  Close the currently running Visual Studio Code application.

#### Task 4: Get metrics in Application Insights

1.  Return to your currently open browser window that's displaying the Azure portal.

1.  Access the **instrm*[yourname]*** Application Insights account that you created earlier in this lab.

1.  From the **Application Insights** blade, find the metrics displayed in the tiles in the center of the blade. Specifically, find the number of server requests that have occurred and the average server response time.

    > **Note**: It can take up to five minutes to observe requests in the Application Insights metrics charts.

#### Review

In this exercise, you created an API by using ASP.NET and configured it to stream application metrics to Application Insights. You then used the Application Insights dashboard to get performance details about your API.

### Exercise 3: Monitor a web app using Application Insights

#### Task 1: Deploy an application to the web app

1.  Open Visual Studio Code.

1.  In Visual Studio Code, open the **Allfiles (F):\\Allfiles\\Labs\\12\\Starter\\Api** folder.

1.  Use the Explorer in Visual Studio Code to open a new terminal with the context set to the current working directory.

1.  Sign in to the Azure Command-Line Interface (CLI) by using your Azure credentials:

    ```
    az login
    ```

1.  List all the apps in your **MonitoredAssets** resource group:
    
    ```
    az webapp list --resource-group MonitoredAssets
    ```

1.  Find the apps that have the prefix **smpapi\***:
    
    ```
    az webapp list --resource-group MonitoredAssets --query "[?starts_with(name, 'smpapi')]"
    ```

1.  Print only the name of the single app that has the prefix **smpapi\***:

    ```
    az webapp list --resource-group MonitoredAssets --query "[?starts_with(name, 'smpapi')].{Name:name}" --output tsv
    ```

1.  Change the current directory to the **Allfiles (F):\\Allfiles\\Labs\\12\\Starter** directory that contains the lab files:

    ```
    cd F:\Allfiles\Labs\12\Starter\
    ```

1.  Deploy the **api.zip** file to the web app that you created earlier in this lab:

    ```
    az webapp deployment source config-zip --resource-group MonitoredAssets --src api.zip --name <name-of-your-api-app>
    ```

    > **Note**: Replace the *name-of-your-api-app* placeholder with the name of the web app that you created earlier in this lab. You recently queried this app’s name in the previous steps.

1.  Return to your currently open browser window that's displaying the Azure portal.

1.  Access the ***smpapi\***[yourname]*** web app that you created earlier in this lab.

1.  Open the ***smpapi\***[yourname]*** web app in your browser.

1.  Perform a GET request to the **/weatherforecast** relative path of the website, and then find the JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) array that's returned as a result of using the API.

    > **Note**: For example, if your URL is https://smpapistudent.azurewebsites.net, the new URL would be https://smpapistudent.azurewebsites.net/weatherforecast.

#### Task 2: Configure in-depth metric collection for Web Apps

1.  Return to your currently open browser window that's displaying the Azure portal.

1.  Access the ***smpapi\***[yourname]*** web app that you created earlier in this lab.

1.  Go to the **Application Insights** configuration section.

1.  **Enable** Application Insights instrumentation for **.NET** by using the following settings:

    -   Collection level: **Recommended**

    -   Profiler: **On**

    -   Snapshot debugger: **Off**

    -   SQL Commands: **Off**

1.  Save your Application Insights instrumentation configuration.

1.  Open the ***smpapi\***[yourname]*** web app in your browser.

1.  Perform a GET request to the **/weatherforecast** relative path of the website, and then observe the JSON array that's returned as a result of using the API.

    > **Note**: For example, if your URL is https://smpapistudent.azurewebsites.net, the new URL would be https://smpapistudent.azurewebsites.net/weatherforecast.

1.  Record the URL that you used to access the JSON array.

    > **Note**: Using the example from the previous step, you would record the URL ``https://smpapistudent.azurewebsites.net/weatherforecast``.

#### Task 3: Get updated metrics in Application Insights

1.  Return to your currently open browser window that's displaying the Azure portal.

1.  Access the **instrm*[yourname]*** Application Insights account that you created earlier in this lab.

1.  From the **Application Insights** blade, find the metrics displayed in the tiles in the center of the blade. Specifically, find the number of server requests that have occurred and the average server response time.

    > **Note**: It can take up to five minutes to observe requests in the Application Insights metrics charts.

#### Task 4: View real-time metrics in Application Insights

1.  Return to your currently open browser window that's displaying the Azure portal.

1.  Access the **instrm*[yourname]*** Application Insights account that you created earlier in this lab.

1.  Open the **Live Metrics Stream** blade for your account.

1.  Open a new **Microsoft Edge** browser window, go to the URL that you recorded earlier in this lab, and then observe the JSON array result.

1.  Return to your currently open browser window that's displaying the Azure portal, and then observe the updated **Live Metrics Stream** blade.

    > **Note**: The **Incoming Requests** section should update in seconds, showing the requests that you made to the web app.

#### Review

In this exercise, you deployed your web app to App Service and monitored your metrics from the same Application Insights instance.

### Exercise 4: Clean up your subscription 

#### Task 1: Open Azure Cloud Shell

1.  In the Azure portal, select the **Cloud Shell** icon to open a new shell instance.

1.  If Cloud Shell isn't already configured, configure the shell for Bash by using the default settings.

#### Task 2: Delete resource groups

1.  Enter the following command, and then select Enter to delete the **MonitoredAssets** resource group:

    ```
    az group delete --name MonitoredAssets --no-wait --yes
    ```
    
1.  Close the Cloud Shell pane in the portal.

#### Task 3: Close the active applications

1.  Close the currently running Microsoft Edge application.

1.  Close the currently running Visual Studio Code application.

#### Review

In this exercise, you cleaned up your subscription by removing the resource groups used in this lab.
